
prostate cancer occurs in the prostate gland, which is located just below the bladder in males and surrounds the top portion of the tube that drains urine from the bladder  urethra . this illustration shows a normal prostate gland and a prostate with a tumor.
prostate cancer occurs in the prostate gland, which is located just below the bladder in males and surrounds the top portion of the tube that drains urine from the bladder  urethra . this illustration shows a normal prostate gland and a prostate with a tumor.
prostate cancer is cancer that occurs in the prostate — a small walnut shaped gland in men that produces the seminal fluid that nourishes and transports sperm.
prostate cancer is one of the most common types of cancer in men. usually prostate cancer grows slowly and is initially confined to the prostate gland, where it may not cause serious harm. however, while some types of prostate cancer grow slowly and may need minimal or even no treatment, other types are aggressive and can spread quickly.
prostate cancer that s detected early — when it s still confined to the prostate gland — has a better chance of successful treatment.
prostate cancer may cause no signs or symptoms in its early stages.
prostate cancer that s more advanced may cause signs and symptoms such as 
make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.
debate continues regarding the risks and benefits of prostate cancer screening, and medical organizations differ on their recommendations. discuss prostate cancer screening with your doctor. together, you can decide what s best for you.
the prostate gland is located just below the bladder in men and surrounds the top portion of the tube that drains urine from the bladder  urethra . the prostate s primary function is to produce the fluid that nourishes and transports sperm  seminal fluid .
the prostate gland is located just below the bladder in men and surrounds the top portion of the tube that drains urine from the bladder  urethra . the prostate s primary function is to produce the fluid that nourishes and transports sperm  seminal fluid .
it s not clear what causes prostate cancer.
doctors know that prostate cancer begins when some cells in your prostate become abnormal. mutations in the abnormal cells  dna cause the cells to grow and divide more rapidly than normal cells do. the abnormal cells continue living, when other cells would die. the accumulating abnormal cells form a tumor that can grow to invade nearby tissue. some abnormal cells can also break off and spread  metastasize  to other parts of the body.
factors that can increase your risk of prostate cancer include 
complications of prostate cancer and its treatments include 
you can reduce your risk of prostate cancer if you 
choose a healthy diet full of fruits and vegetables. avoid high fat foods and instead focus on choosing a variety of fruits, vegetables and whole grains. fruits and vegetables contain many vitamins and nutrients that can contribute to your health.
whether you can prevent prostate cancer through diet has yet to be conclusively proved. but eating a healthy diet with a variety of fruits and vegetables can improve your overall health.
exercise most days of the week. exercise improves your overall health, helps you maintain your weight and improves your mood. there is some evidence that men who don t exercise have higher psa levels, while men who exercise may have a lower risk of prostate cancer.
try to exercise most days of the week. if you re new to exercise, start slow and work your way up to more exercise time each day.
talk to your doctor about increased risk of prostate cancer. men with a high risk of prostate cancer may consider medications or other treatments to reduce their risk. some studies suggest that taking 5 alpha reductase inhibitors, including finasteride  propecia, proscar  and dutasteride  avodart , may reduce the overall risk of developing prostate cancer. these drugs are used to control prostate gland enlargement and hair loss in men.
however, some evidence indicates that men taking these medications may have an increased risk of getting a more serious form of prostate cancer  high grade prostate cancer . if you re concerned about your risk of developing prostate cancer, talk with your doctor.

during a digital rectal exam, your doctor inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into your rectum and feels the back wall of the prostate gland for enlargement, tenderness, lumps or hard spots.
during a digital rectal exam, your doctor inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into your rectum and feels the back wall of the prostate gland for enlargement, tenderness, lumps or hard spots.
whether to test healthy men with no symptoms for prostate cancer is controversial. medical organizations don t agree on the issue of screening and whether it delivers benefits.
some medical organizations recommend men consider prostate cancer screening in their 50s, or sooner for men who have risk factors for prostate cancer.
discuss your particular situation and the benefits and risks of screening with your doctor. together, you can decide whether prostate cancer screening is right for you.
prostate screening tests might include 
psa testing combined with dre helps identify prostate cancers at their earliest stages. hence, debate continues surrounding prostate cancer screening.
if a dre or psa test detects an abnormality, your doctor may recommend further tests to determine whether you have prostate cancer, such as 
at mayo clinic, urologists and radiologists collaborate to leverage mri fusion biopsy technology, yielding the best fusion imaging available for prostate cancer care.
mayo clinic also leverages mri trus fusion technology, which blends  fuses  images from an mri scan and transrectal ultrasound  trus  to create a more precise 360 degree prostate map, which in turn can improve prostate biopsy accuracy.
mayo clinic is also the first medical center in the united states approved by the food and drug administration to prepare and administer c 11 choline pet scanning to help detect recurrent prostate cancer at its earliest stages — before it can be detected by other imaging tests — and enable more precise targeting for follow up treatment.
when a biopsy confirms the presence of cancer, the next step is to determine the level of aggressiveness  grade  of the cancer cells. a laboratory pathologist examines a sample of your cancer to determine how much cancer cells differ from the healthy cells. a higher grade indicates a more aggressive cancer that is more likely to spread quickly.
the most common scale used to evaluate the grade of prostate cancer cells is called a gleason score. gleason scoring combines two numbers and can range from 2  nonaggressive cancer  to 10  very aggressive cancer , though the lower part of the range isn t used as often.
most gleason scores used to assess prostate biopsy samples range from 6 to 10. a score of 6 indicates a low grade prostate cancer. a score of 7 indicates a medium grade prostate cancer. scores from 8 to 10 indicate high grade cancers.
 in addition, genomic testing is increasingly being used to more accurately assess risk and detect aggressive prostate cancer.
mayo clinic physicians and researchers are leaders in the development of biomarkers for prostate cancer. doctors in mayo clinic s center for individualized medicine are advancing research on the use of biomarkers in blood and in prostate tissue to better individualize and optimize treatment for men with prostate cancer. the technology helps caregivers distinguish between insignificant and significant prostate cancer, as well as identify particularly aggressive prostate cancer in men undergoing surgery.
during a transrectal biopsy, a biopsy gun quickly projects a thin needle into suspect areas of the prostate gland, and small sections of tissue are removed for analysis.
during a transrectal biopsy, a biopsy gun quickly projects a thin needle into suspect areas of the prostate gland, and small sections of tissue are removed for analysis.
once a prostate cancer diagnosis has been made, your doctor works to determine the extent  stage  of the cancer. if your doctor suspects your cancer may have spread beyond your prostate, one or more of the following imaging tests may be recommended 
at mayo clinic, caregivers can also turn to prostate specific membrane antigen  psma  studies to help detect the extent of newly diagnosed prostate cancer and whether the disease has spread to nearby lymph nodes.
mayo clinicians also use recent 7 tesla  7t  magnet imaging technology advancements to differentiate between prostate cancer that does or doesn t require immediate intervention.
not every person should have every test. your doctor will help determine which tests are best for your individual case.
your doctor uses the information from these tests to assign your cancer a stage. prostate cancer stages are indicated by roman numerals ranging from i to iv. the lowest stages indicate the cancer is confined to the prostate. by stage iv, the cancer has grown beyond the prostate and may have spread to other areas of the body.
the cancer staging system continues to evolve and is becoming more complex as doctors improve cancer diagnosis and treatment. your doctor uses your cancer stage to select the treatments that are right for you.
a mayo clinic oncologist discusses treatment options.
your prostate cancer treatment options depend on several factors, such as how fast your cancer is growing, how much it has spread and your overall health, as well as the potential benefits or side effects of the treatment.
for men diagnosed with low risk prostate cancer, treatment may not be necessary right away. some men may never need treatment. instead, doctors sometimes recommend active surveillance.
in active surveillance, regular follow up blood tests, rectal exams and possibly biopsies may be performed to monitor progression of your cancer. if tests show your cancer is progressing, you may opt for a prostate cancer treatment such as surgery or radiation.
active surveillance may be an option for cancer that isn t causing symptoms, is expected to grow very slowly and is confined to a small area of the prostate. active surveillance may also be considered for someone who has another serious health condition or who is of an advanced age that makes cancer treatment more difficult.
active surveillance carries a risk that the cancer may grow and spread between checkups, making the cancer less likely to be cured.
a mayo clinic surgeon converses about prostate cancer surgical options.
surgery for prostate cancer involves removing the prostate gland  radical prostatectomy , some surrounding tissue and a few lymph nodes. radical prostatectomy can be performed in several ways 
discuss with your doctor which type of surgery is best for your specific situation.
radical prostatectomy carries a risk of urinary incontinence and erectile dysfunction. ask your doctor to explain the risks you may face based on your situation, the type of procedure you select, your age, your body type and your overall health.
radiation therapy uses high powered energy to kill cancer cells. prostate cancer radiation therapy can be delivered in two ways 
side effects of radiation therapy can include painful, frequent or urgent urination, as well as rectal symptoms such as loose stools or pain when passing stools. erectile dysfunction can also occur.
hormone therapy is treatment to stop your body from producing the male hormone testosterone. prostate cancer cells rely on testosterone to help them grow. cutting off the supply of testosterone may cause cancer cells to die or to grow more slowly.
hormone therapy options include 
hormone therapy is used in men with advanced prostate cancer to shrink the cancer and slow the growth of tumors. in men with early stage prostate cancer, hormone therapy may be used to shrink tumors before radiation therapy, which can increase the likelihood that radiation therapy will be successful.
side effects of hormone therapy may include erectile dysfunction, hot flashes, loss of bone mass, reduced sex drive and weight gain.
cryosurgery or cryoablation involves freezing tissue to kill cancer cells.
during cryosurgery for prostate cancer, small needles are inserted in the prostate using ultrasound images as guidance. a very cold gas is placed in the needles, which causes the surrounding tissue to freeze. a second gas is then placed in the needles to reheat the tissue. the cycles of freezing and thawing kill the cancer cells and some surrounding healthy tissue.
initial attempts to use cryosurgery for prostate cancer resulted in high complication rates and unacceptable side effects. however, newer technologies have lowered complication rates, improved cancer control and made the procedure easier to tolerate. cryosurgery is more frequently used as a salvage therapy for men who haven t been helped by radiation therapy.
chemotherapy uses drugs to kill rapidly growing cells, including cancer cells. chemotherapy can be administered through a vein in your arm, in pill form or both.
chemotherapy may be a treatment option for men with prostate cancer that has spread to remote body locations. chemotherapy may also be an option for cancers that don t respond to hormone therapy.
permanent prostate brachytherapy involves placing many radioactive seeds within the prostate to treat prostate cancer. during the procedure, an ultrasound probe is placed in the rectum to help guide the placement of seeds. the seeds emit radiation that dissipates over a few months.
permanent prostate brachytherapy involves placing many radioactive seeds within the prostate to treat prostate cancer. during the procedure, an ultrasound probe is placed in the rectum to help guide the placement of seeds. the seeds emit radiation that dissipates over a few months.
biological therapy  immunotherapy  uses your body s immune system to fight cancer cells. one type of biological therapy called sipuleucel t  provenge  has been developed to treat advanced, recurrent prostate cancer.
this treatment takes some of your own immune cells, genetically engineers them in a laboratory to fight prostate cancer, then injects the cells back into your body through a vein. some men do respond to this therapy with some improvement in their cancer, but the treatment is very expensive and requires multiple treatments.

explore mayo clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this disease.
    
no complementary or alternative treatments will cure prostate cancer. however, complementary and alternative prostate cancer treatments may help you cope with the side effects of cancer and its treatment.
nearly everyone diagnosed with cancer experiences some distress at some point. if you re distressed, you may feel sad, angry or anxious. you may experience difficulty sleeping or find yourself constantly thinking about your cancer.
several complementary medicine techniques may help you cope with your distress, including 
discuss your feelings and concerns with your doctor. in some cases, treatment for distress may require medications.
when you receive a diagnosis of prostate cancer, you may experience a range of feelings — including disbelief, fear, anger, anxiety and depression. with time, each person finds his own way of coping with a prostate cancer diagnosis.
until you find what works for you, try to 
if you have signs or symptoms that worry you, start by seeing your family doctor or a general practitioner.
if your doctor suspects you may have a problem with your prostate, you may be referred to a urinary tract specialist  urologist . if you re diagnosed with prostate cancer, you may be referred to a cancer specialist  oncologist  or a specialist who uses radiation therapy to treat cancer  radiation oncologist .
because appointments can be brief, and because there s often a lot of ground to cover, it s a good idea to be prepared. here s some information to help you get ready and what to expect from your doctor.
your time with your doctor is limited, so preparing a list of questions can help you make the most of your time together. list your questions from most important to least important in case time runs out. for prostate cancer, some basic questions to ask your doctor include 
in addition to the questions that you ve prepared to ask your doctor, don t hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
your doctor is likely to ask you a number of questions. being ready to answer them may allow more time later to cover other points you want to address. your doctor may ask 